.. _overview:

Overview
========

:math:`\texttt{SEDA}` (Spectral Energy Distribution Analyzer) is an open-source Python package for forward modeling and empirical analysis of spectral energy distributions for brown dwarfs, directly imaged exoplanets, and low-mass stars.

This `PDF <https://github.com/suarezgenaro/seda/blob/main/docs/AAS245_SEDA_GSuarez.pdf>`_ file introduces the code and its main functionality as of January 2025, as presented at the 245th AAS meeting.

.. _seda_overview:

Principal Modules
-----------------

For Forward Modeling
++++++++++++++++++++
  - :mod:`~seda.input_parameters`: Defines all input parameters, namely :class:`~seda.input_parameters.InputData`, :class:`~seda.input_parameters.ModelOptions`, :class:`~seda.input_parameters.Chi2Options`, and :class:`~seda.input_parameters.BayesOptions`.
  - :mod:`~seda.chi2_fit`: Provides the main function :func:`~seda.chi2_fit.chi2`, which finds the best model fits from :ref:`models` using the `LMFIT <https://lmfit.github.io/lmfit-py/>`_ non-linear least-squares minimization Python package by (`Newville et al. 2014 <https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014zndo.....11813N/abstract>`_).
  - :mod:`~seda.bayes_fit`: Provides the main function :func:`~seda.bayes_fit.bayes`, which estimates Bayesian posteriors using `dynesty <https://dynesty.readthedocs.io/en/stable/index.html>`_ dynamic nested sampling package by (`Speagle 2020 <https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2020MNRAS.493.3132S/abstract>`_).
  - :mod:`~seda.plots`: Includes functions for visualizing results generated by the modules above.

For Empirical Analysis
++++++++++++++++++++++
  - :mod:`~seda.spectral_indices.spectral_indices`: Measures spectral indices to quantify the depth of key spectral features in the data.
  - :mod:`~seda.synthetic_photometry.synthetic_photometry`: Derive synthetic phothometry from spectra for any `SVO filter IDs <http://svo2.cab.inta-csic.es/theory/fps/>`_.
  - :mod:`~seda.utils`: Provides additional useful functions (see :ref:`seda_tools` for details).

Code Workflow of Forward Modeling
---------------------------------
  - Download any :ref:`models`.
  - Load input data (:class:`~seda.input_parameters.InputData`).
  - Load model options (:class:`~seda.input_parameters.ModelOptions`).

  - Option 1: chi-square minimization (see `tutorial_chi2_fit_single_spectrum <https://seda.readthedocs.io/en/latest/notebooks/tutorial_chi2_fit_single_spectrum.html>`_ and/or `tutorial_chi2_fit_multiple_spectra <https://seda.readthedocs.io/en/latest/notebooks/tutorial_chi2_fit_multiple_spectra.html>`_).

    - Load chi-square fit options (:class:`~seda.input_parameters.Chi2Options`).
    - Run chi-square minimization (:func:`~seda.chi2_fit.chi2`).

  - Option 2: Bayesian sampling (see `tutorial_bayes_fit_single_spectrum <https://seda.readthedocs.io/en/latest/notebooks/tutorial_bayes_fit_single_spectrum.html>`_ and/or `tutorial_bayes_fit_multiple_spectra <https://seda.readthedocs.io/en/latest/notebooks/tutorial_bayes_fit_multiple_spectra.html>`_ spectra).

    - Load Bayesian fit options (:class:`~seda.input_parameters.BayesOptions`).
    - Run Bayesian framework module (:func:`~seda.bayes_fit.bayes`).

  - Visualize the results (:mod:`~seda.plots`)

.. _seda_tools:

Useful Tools
------------

:math:`\texttt{SEDA}` includes several useful functions that can be used separately.

Empirical Analysis
++++++++++++++++++

  - :func:`~seda.synthetic_photometry.synthetic_photometry.synthetic_photometry`: Calculates synthetic phothometry from spectra for any `SVO filter IDs <http://svo2.cab.inta-csic.es/theory/fps/>`_ (see `tutorial_synthetic_photometry <https://seda.readthedocs.io/en/latest/notebooks/tutorial_synthetic_photometry.html>`_).
  - :mod:`~seda.spectral_indices.spectral_indices`: Measures the depth of absorption features using literature-defined or user-defined spectral indices. It includes:

    - :func:`~seda.spectral_indices.spectral_indices.silicate_index` to assess cloudiness via the 9 microns silicate absorption (`Suárez & Metchev 2022 <https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022MNRAS.513.5701S/abstract>`_, `Suárez & Metchev 2023 <https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2023MNRAS.523.4739S/abstract>`_).
    - :func:`~seda.spectral_indices.spectral_indices.water_index` for the 6.25 microns water absorption, :func:`~seda.spectral_indices.spectral_indices.methane_index` for the 7.65 microns methane feature, and :func:`~seda.spectral_indices.spectral_indices.ammonia_index` for the 10.5 microns ammonia feature (`Cushing et al. 2006 <https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2006ApJ...648..614C/abstract>`_, `Suárez & Metchev 2022 <https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022MNRAS.513.5701S/abstract>`_, `Suárez & Metchev 2023 <https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2023MNRAS.523.4739S/abstract>`_) (see `tutorial_spectral_indices <https://seda.readthedocs.io/en/latest/notebooks/tutorial_spectral_indices.html>`_  and `spectral_indices <https://github.com/suarezgenaro/spectral_indices>`_).
    - Near-infrared indices designed to identify potential variable objects (`Ashraf et al. 2022 <https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022ApJ...934..178A>`_, `Oliveros-Gomez et al. 2022 <https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022ApJ...939...72O>`_, `Oliveros-Gomez et al. 2024 <https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2024ApJ...967..149O>`_).
    - :func:`~seda.spectral_indices.spectral_indices.user_index` for a user-defined spectral index, using the same approaches as the literature-defined indices described above.
  - :func:`~seda.synthetic_photometry.synthetic_photometry.flux_to_mag`: Converts fluxes into magnitudes for any `SVO filter IDs <http://svo2.cab.inta-csic.es/theory/fps/>`_.
  - :func:`~seda.synthetic_photometry.synthetic_photometry.mag_to_flux`: Converts magnitudes into fluxes for any `SVO filter IDs <http://svo2.cab.inta-csic.es/theory/fps/>`_.
  - :func:`~seda.synthetic_photometry.synthetic_photometry.convert_flux`: Converts fluxes from wavelength units (erg/s/cm2/s) to frequency units (Jy) or vice versa.
  - :func:`~seda.utils.spt_to_teff`: Estimates effective temperatures from spectral types using relationships in the literature.
  - :func:`~seda.utils.teff_to_spt`: Estimates spectral type from effective temperature, using numerical inversion of :func:`~seda.utils.spt_to_teff`.
  - :func:`~seda.utils.app_to_abs_flux`: Converts apparent fluxes into absolute fluxes considering a distance.

Forward Modeling
++++++++++++++++

  - :func:`~seda.utils.generate_model_spectrum`: Generates a synthetic spectrum with any parameters (within the grid coverage) from the indicated atmospheric models using interpolation techniques.
  - :func:`~seda.utils.read_model_spectrum`: Reads a synthetic spectrum from :ref:`models`.
  - :func:`~seda.utils.separate_params`: Extracts parameters from model spectra file names.
  - :func:`~seda.plots.plot_model_coverage` and :func:`~seda.plots.plot_model_resolution`: Visualize parameters' coverage and resolution of :ref:`models` (see `tutorial_models_examination <https://seda.readthedocs.io/en/latest/notebooks/tutorial_models_examination.html>`_).


Auxiliary Tools
+++++++++++++++

  - :func:`~seda.utils.read_SVO_params`: Reads parameters of interest (e.g., effective wavelength, effective width, and zero point) from SVO for a list of filters.
  - :func:`~seda.utils.convolve_spectrum`: Convolves spectra to a desired resolution at a given wavelength.


.. _models:

Available Atmospheric Models
----------------------------

:math:`\texttt{SEDA}` can use several modern and widely used atmospheric models, as indicated below. Check out `tutorial_models_examination <https://seda.readthedocs.io/en/latest/notebooks/tutorial_models_examination.html>`_ to see the parameters' coverage and resolution of the models.

Sonora Diamondback Models
+++++++++++++++++++++++++

Cloudy (silicate clouds) atmospheric models assuming chemical equilibrium but considering the effect of both clouds and metallicity by `Morley et al (2024) <https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2024ApJ...975...59M/abstract>`_. Download the `Sonora Diamondback models <https://zenodo.org/records/12735103>`_.

Parameter coverage:

.. code-block:: console

  - wavelength = [0.3, 250] um
  - Teff = [900, 2400] K in steps of 100 K
  - logg = [3.5, 5.5] in steps of 0.5
  - [M/H] = [-0.5, 0.5] (cgs) in steps of 0.5
  - fsed = 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, nc


Sonora Elf Owl Models
+++++++++++++++++++++

Models with atmospheric mixing and chemical disequilibrium with varying metallicity and C/O by `Mukherjee et al. (2024) <https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2024ApJ...963...73M/abstract>`_. Download the Sonora Elf Owl models for `L-type <https://zenodo.org/records/10385987>`_, `T-type <https://zenodo.org/records/10385821>`_, and `Y-type <https://zenodo.org/records/10381250>`_.

Parameter coverage:

.. code-block:: console

  - wavelength = [0.6, 15] um
  - Teff = [275, 2400] K in steps: 25 K for 275-600 K, 50 K for 600-1000 K, and 100 K for 1000-2400 K
  - logg = [3.25, 5.50] in steps of 0.25 dex plus logg=3.0 for Teff=[275-2000], logKzz=8, [M/H]=1.0, and C/O=1.0.
  - logKzz = 2, 4, 7, 8, and 9 (Kzz in cm2/s)
  - [M/H] = -1.0, -0.5, +0.0, +0.5, +0.7, and +1.0 (cgs)
  - C/O = 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.5 (relative to solar C/O, assumed as 0.458) (these are the values in the filenames). It corresponds to C/O=[0.22, 1.12] with values of 0.22, 0.458, 0.687, and 1.12 (e.g. 0.5 in the filename means 0.5*0.458=0.22)

Lacy & Burrows (2023) Models
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Cloudy (water clouds) atmospheric models with equilibrium and non-equilibrium chemistry for Y-dwarf atmospheres by `Lacy & Burrows (2023) <https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2023ApJ...950....8L/abstract>`_. Download the `LB23 models <https://zenodo.org/records/7779180>`_. The extended models are shared on request to the authors. The models include four grids: 

  - ClearEQ: cloudless models with equilibrium chemistry
  - ClearNEQ: cloudless models with non-equilibrium chemistry
  - CloudyEQ: cloudy models with equilibrium chemistry
  - CloudyNEQ: cloudy models with non-equilibrium chemistry

Parameter coverage in common for all grids:

.. code-block:: console

  - wavelength = [0.5, 300] um with 30,000 frequency points evenly spaced in ln(frequency)
  - R~4340 (average resolving power)

Parameter coverage for cloudless models:

.. code-block:: console

  - Teff = [200, 600] K in steps of 25 K
  - logg = [3.50, 5.00] in steps of 0.25 (g in cgs)
  - [M/H] = -0.5, 0.0, and 0.5 (Z/Z_sun = 0.316, 1.0, 3.16)
  - logKzz = 6 for non-equilibrium models
  
Parameter coverage for cloudy models (there are some additional cloudy atmospheres extending to lower surface gravities and warmer temperatures in some combinations where convergence was easy): 

.. code-block:: console

  - Teff = [200, 400] K (200-350 for Z/Z_sun=3.16) in steps of 25 K 
  - logg = [3.75, 5.00] in steps of 0.25 (g in cgs)
  - [M/H] = -0.5, 0.0, and 0.5 (Z/Z_sun = 0.316, 1.0, 3.16), but some Z/Z_sun=3.16 are missing
  - logKzz = 6 for non-equilibrium models
  
Extended models (additions to models in the paper). This grid replaces the original one ("The original spectra had an inconsistent wavelength grid and was missing CO2, so new ones are really a replacement.")

.. code-block:: console
  
  - Teff up to 800 K
  - Hmix (mixing length) = 1.0, 0.1, and 0.01

Sonora Cholla Models
++++++++++++++++++++

Cloudless models with non-equilibrium chemistry due to different eddy diffusion parameters by `Karalidi et al. (2021) <https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021ApJ...923..269K/abstract>`_. Download the `Sonora Cholla models <https://zenodo.org/records/4450269>`_.

Parameter coverage:

.. code-block:: console

  - wavelength = [1, 250] um for Teff>=850 K (plus some with Teff=750 K)
  - wavelength = [0.3, 250] um for Teff<800 K (plus 950K_1780g_logkzz2.spec)
  - Teff = [500, 1300] K in steps of 50 K
  - logg = [3.00, 5.50] in steps of 0.25 (g in cgs)
  - log Kzz=2, 4, and 7

Sonora Bobcat Models
++++++++++++++++++++

Cloudless models in chemical equilibrium by `Marley et al. (2021) <https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021ApJ...920...85M/abstract>`_. Download the `Sonora Bobcat models <https://zenodo.org/records/5063476>`_.

Parameter coverage:

.. code-block:: console
  
  - wavelength = [0.4, 50] um
  - Teff = [200, 2400] K in steps: 25 K for 200-600 K, 50 K for 600-1000 K, and 100 K for 1000-2400 K
  - logg = [3.25, 5.50] in steps of 0.25 (g in cgs)
  - M/H=-0.5, 0.0, and 0.5
  - C/O = 0.5, 1.0 (solar C/O), and 1.5 for solar metallicity models
  - R = [6000, 200000] (the resolving power varies with wavelength but is otherwise the same for all spectra)

ATMO 2020 Models
++++++++++++++++

Cloudless atmospheric models with chemical and non-chemical equilibrium by `Phillips et al. (2020) <https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2020A%26A...637A..38P/abstract>`_. Download the `ATMO 2020 models <https://noctis.erc-atmo.eu/fsdownload/zyU96xA6o/phillips2020>`_. The models include three grids:
  
  - ATMO2020_CEQ: cloudless models with equilibrium chemistry.
  - ATMO2020_NEQ_weak: cloudless models with non-equilibrium chemistry due to weak vertical mixing (logKzz=4).
  - ATMO2020_NEQ_strong: cloudless models with non-equilibrium chemistry due to strong vertical mixing (logKzz=6).

Parameter coverage:

.. code-block:: console
  
  - wavelength = [0.2, 2000] um
  - Teff = [200, 2400] K in steps varying from 25 K to 100 K
  - logg = [2.5, 5.5] in steps of 0.5 (g in cgs)
  - logKzz = 0 (ATMO2020_CEQ), 4 (ATMO2020_NEQ_weak), and 6 (ATMO2020_NEQ_strong)

BT-Settl Models
+++++++++++++++

Cloudy models with non-equilibrium chemistry by `Allard et al. (2012) <https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2012RSPTA.370.2765A/abstract>`_. Download the `BT-Settl models <http://phoenix.ens-lyon.fr/simulator/>`_.

Parameter coverage:

.. code-block:: console
  
  - wavelength = [1.e-4, 1000] um
  - Teff = [200, 7000] K (Teff<=450 K for only logg<=3.5) in steps varying from 20 K to 100 K
  - logg = [2.0, 5.5] in steps of 0.5 (g in cgs)
  - R = [100000, 500000] (the resolving power varies with wavelength)

Saumon & Marley (2008) Models
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Cloudy models with equilibrium chemistry by `Saumon & Marley (2008) <https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2008ApJ...689.1327S>`_. SM08 models are shared on request to the authors.

Parameter coverage:

.. code-block:: console

  - wavelength = [0.4, 50] um
  - Teff = [800, 2400] K in steps of 100 K
  - logg = [3.0, 5.5] in steps of 0.5 (g in cgs)
  - fsed = 1, 2, 3, 4
  - R = [100000, 700000] (the resolving power varies with wavelength)

.. _evolutionary_models:

Available Evolutionary Models
-----------------------------

:math:`\texttt{SEDA}` can interpolate evolutionary models to infer fundamental parameters (mass, age, surface gravity, and effective temperature) from a bolometric luminosity and radius using :func:`~seda.phy_params.evol_params`. Check out `tutorial_evolutionary_models_examination <https://seda.readthedocs.io/en/latest/notebooks/tutorial_evolutionary_models_examination.html>`_ to see the parameter coverage of the bundled evolutionary tables.

Sonora Bobcat Evolutionary Tables
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Evolutionary tables accompanying the cloudless, chemical-equilibrium atmospheric models by `Marley et al. (2021) <https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021ApJ...920...85M/abstract>`_. Three ``*_mass`` tables (constant-mass cooling tracks) at solar C/O are bundled with :math:`\texttt{SEDA}` for [M/H] = -0.5, 0.0, and 0.5. The original tables are also available from the `Sonora Bobcat models <https://zenodo.org/records/5063476>`_ (``evolution_and_photometry`` archive).

Parameter coverage:

.. code-block:: console

  - mass = [0.52, 84] Mjup (0.0005 to 0.08 Msun)
  - age = [0.001, 15] Gyr
  - Lbol = [6.1e-10, 2.2e-3] Lsun (log L/Lsun = [-9.21, -2.66])
  - R = [0.75, 2.59] Rjup
  - logg = [2.65, 5.48] (g in cgs)
  - Teff = [91, 2537] K
  - Metallicity [M/H] = -0.5, 0.0, and 0.5 dex (select table with ``filename`` in :func:`~seda.phy_params.evol_params`)
  - C/O = 1.0 (solar)

Bundled tables (pass as ``filename`` basename):

.. code-block:: console

  - ``nc-0.5_co1.0_mass``  ([M/H] = -0.5)
  - ``nc+0.0_co1.0_mass``  ([M/H] = +0.0)
  - ``nc+0.5_co1.0_mass``  ([M/H] = +0.5)

Sonora Diamondback Evolutionary Tables
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Evolutionary tables accompanying the cloudy atmospheric models by `Morley et al (2024) <https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2024ApJ...975...59M/abstract>`_. Nine ``*_mass`` tables (constant-mass cooling tracks) are bundled with :math:`\texttt{SEDA}` for three cloud treatments (``nc``, ``hybrid_f2``, and ``hybrid-grav_f2``) at [M/H] = -0.5, 0.0, and 0.5. The original tables are also available from the `Sonora Diamondback models <https://zenodo.org/records/12735103>`_.

Parameter coverage:

.. code-block:: console

  - mass = [0.52, 84] Mjup (0.0005 to 0.08 Msun)
  - age = [0.002, 13] Gyr
  - Lbol = [1.6e-8, 3.7e-3] Lsun (log L/Lsun = [-7.81, -2.43])
  - R = [7.2, 31] Rjup
  - logg = [2.57, 5.51] (g in cgs)
  - Teff = [200, 2500] K
  - Cloud treatment = ``nc``, ``hybrid_f2``, or ``hybrid-grav_f2`` 
  - Metallicity [M/H] = -0.5, 0.0, and 0.5 dex 

Bundled tables (pass as ``filename`` basename):

.. code-block:: console

  - ``nc_m-0.5_mass``, ``nc_m0.0_mass``, ``nc_m+0.5_mass``  (cloudless; [M/H] = -0.5, 0.0, +0.5)
  - ``hybrid_f2_m-0.5_mass``, ``hybrid_f2_m0.0_mass``, ``hybrid_f2_m+0.5_mass``  (hybrid clouds, f\ :sub:`sed`\ = 2)
  - ``hybrid-grav_f2_m-0.5_mass``, ``hybrid-grav_f2_m0.0_mass``, ``hybrid-grav_f2_m+0.5_mass``  (hybrid-grav clouds, f\ :sub:`sed`\ = 2)

For more information on these filenames, please refer to the 'Evolution' section at `Sonora Diamondback models <https://zenodo.org/records/12735103>`_.

:func:`~seda.phy_params.evol_params` reads a bundled evolutionary table selected by ``filename``.
If a model folder contains only one table, ``filename`` may be omitted. Inferred parameters
are returned in the native units defined in each model's ``config.json`` (mass in M\ :sub:`sun`\ ,
age in Gyr, etc.). See :doc:`notebooks/tutorial_ingest_evolutionary_models` to add custom models.

